

The mathematical theory of data (MToD) is a putative meta-theory intended to support technology-independent reasoning about *data specifications*, where that term 
is understood very generally to mean descriptions of how particulars within some subject domain or discursive context are, or are to be, represented in data.

Its scope spans the relational theory of data originating in 1970, including the various classical definitions of normal form, together with the later re-targeting of these normal forms toward hierarchical representations of data, as found in message structures generally and typified by XML.

The theory is abstract in that it remains neutral with respect to the universals by which particulars are represented in data — such as integer, float, and string — and with respect to their binary encodings. It seeks to explain both the viability and the interchangeability of hierarchical and relational forms of data specification.

We aim to show that it is possible to formulate both general principles and specific criteria for the goodness of data specifications, and to establish the latter through chains of mathematically provable logical implication:

General Principles ⇒ Specific Goodness Criteria ⇒ Classical Normal Forms.

In this way, the general principles are to provide an explanation of the classical normal forms — forms that have often retained an air of mystery — and a means of generalising them beyond the relational sphere in which they were first formulated.

Analysis suggests that everyday descriptions of particular things in common language are shaped, in part, by occurrences of equivalent paths within the network of functional relationships present in the subject domain. 
To achieve good data specifications within such a domain, 
the effects of these equivalent paths must be taken into account. 
Since category theory is the most appropriate formalism for reasoning 
about equivalent paths we are led to the conclusion that 
category theory should play a role in the mathematical theory of data. 
Indeed, the contention is that
a data specification must be a sketch of some sort of categorical structure, 
and that it is the language of category theory that enables us to articulate 
precise principles and criteria of goodness.

In recent work I have explored the role of range categories in delivering this
proposed meta-theory. It is range categories which enable
us to deliver on the goal of abstracting and rationalising Codd's third normal form.


